.\" This man page attempts to follow the conventions and recommendations found
.\" in Michael Kerrisk's man-pages(7) and GNU's groff_man(7), and groff(7).
.\"
.\" The following macro definitions come from groff's an-ext.tmac.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2007-2014  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Written by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"            Werner Lemberg <wl@gnu.org>
.\"
.\" You may freely use, modify and/or distribute this file.
.\"
.\" If _not_ GNU roff, define macros to handle synopsis and URLs.
.if !\n[.g] \{\
.\" Declare start of command synopsis.  Sets up hanging indentation.
.de SY
.  ie !\\n(mS \{\
.    nh
.    nr mS 1
.    nr mA \\n(.j
.    ad l
.    nr mI \\n(.i
.  \}
.  el \{\
.    br
.    ns
.  \}
.
.  nr mT \w'\fB\\$1\fP\ '
.  HP \\n(mTu
.  B "\\$1"
..
.
.
.\" End of command synopsis.  Restores adjustment.
.de YS
.  in \\n(mIu
.  ad \\n(mA
.  hy \\n(HY
.  nr mS 0
..
.
.
.\" Declare optional option.
.de OP
.  ie \\n(.$-1 \
.    RI "[\fB\\$1\fP" "\ \\$2" "]"
.  el \
.    RB "[" "\\$1" "]"
..
.
.
.\" Start URL.
.de UR
.  ds m1 \\$1\"
.  nh
.  if \\n(mH \{\
.    \" Start diversion in a new environment.
.    do ev URL-div
.    do di URL-div
.  \}
..
.
.
.\" End URL.
.de UE
.  ie \\n(mH \{\
.    br
.    di
.    ev
.
.    \" Has there been one or more input lines for the link text?
.    ie \\n(dn \{\
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">"
.      \" Yes, strip off final newline of diversion and emit it.
.      do chop URL-div
.      do URL-div
\c
.      do HTML-NS </a>
.    \}
.    el \
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">\\*(m1</a>"
\&\\$*\"
.  \}
.  el \
\\*(la\\*(m1\\*(ra\\$*\"
.
.  hy \\n(HY
..
.\} \" not GNU roff
.\" End of Free Software Foundation copyrighted material.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2001, 2017 Branden Robinson
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
.\" obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
.\" files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
.\" restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy,
.\" modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies
.\" of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
.\" included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
.\" NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH cmddump 1 2017-04-04 xtrs
.SH Name
cmddump \- simulated TRS-80 CMD file loader
.SH Synopsis
.SY cmddump
.OP \-d
.OP \-i n
.OP \-m
.OP \-p entry
.OP \-q
.OP \-s
.OP \-t
.OP \-x
.I infile
.RI [ "outfile startbyte nbytes" ]
.SH Description
.B cmddump
displays information about TRS-80 DOS CMD (binary executable) files.
It takes a mandatory input CMD file
.IR infile,
and an optional triplet of arguments: an output file
.IR outfile ,
a starting offset of
.I startbyte
into the CMD file
.IR infile ,
and a number of bytes to dump,
.IR nbytes .
If
.IR "outfile, startbyte, " and " nbytes "
are specified, the given byte range is dumped from the simulated memory after
loading.
.PP
The numeric arguments, including that to the option
.BR \-i ,
may be given in any format recognized by
.BR strtol (3);
in other words, traditional C literals for decimal, octal, and hexadecimal.
.SH Options
The optional arguments and their parameters direct
.B cmddump
as follows.
.TP
.B \-d
print detailed map; same as
.BR \-m ,
but do not coalesce adjacent blocks
.TP
.BI "\-i " n
select ISAM entry \fIn\fP
.TP
.B \-m
print running load map as file is parsed, coalescing adjacent blocks (implies
.BR \-t );
default
.TP
.BI "\-p " entry
select PDS entry
.IR entry ;
.B cmddump
will truncate or right-pad
.I entry
with spaces, as needed, to the required fixed field width
.TP
.B \-q
quiet; turns off
.BR \-d ,
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-s ,
and
.B \-t
(later flags can override)
.TP
.B \-s
print summary load map after file is parsed
.TP
.B \-t
print text of module headers, PDS headers, patch names, and copyright notices
.TP
.B \-x
ignore anything after the first transfer address
.SH See also
.BR xtrs (1)
.PP
The
.\" If GNU roff, use hyphenless breakpoints.
.ie \n[.g] .UR http://\:www.tim-mann.org/\:misosys.html
.el .UR http://www.tim-mann.org/misosys.html
.IR "LDOS Quarterly" ,
April 1, 1982 (Vol 1, No 4)
.UE ,
has documentation of the TRS-80 DOS CMD file format.
.\" $Id$
.\" vim:set et ft=nroff tw=80:
