.\" This man page attempts to follow the conventions and recommendations found
.\" in Michael Kerrisk's man-pages(7) and GNU's groff_man(7), and groff(7).
.\"
.\" The following macro definitions come from groff's an-ext.tmac.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2007-2014  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Written by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"            Werner Lemberg <wl@gnu.org>
.\"
.\" You may freely use, modify and/or distribute this file.
.\"
.\" If _not_ GNU roff, define UR and UE macros to handle URLs.
.if !\n[.g] \{\
.\" Start URL.
.de UR
.  ds m1 \\$1\"
.  nh
.  if \\n(mH \{\
.    \" Start diversion in a new environment.
.    do ev URL-div
.    do di URL-div
.  \}
..
.
.
.\" End URL.
.de UE
.  ie \\n(mH \{\
.    br
.    di
.    ev
.
.    \" Has there been one or more input lines for the link text?
.    ie \\n(dn \{\
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">"
.      \" Yes, strip off final newline of diversion and emit it.
.      do chop URL-div
.      do URL-div
\c
.      do HTML-NS </a>
.    \}
.    el \
.      do HTML-NS "<a href=""\\*(m1"">\\*(m1</a>"
\&\\$*\"
.  \}
.  el \
\\*(la\\*(m1\\*(ra\\$*\"
.
.  hy \\n(HY
..
.\} \" not GNU roff
.\" End of Free Software Foundation copyrighted material.
.\"
.\" Copyright 2001 Branden Robinson
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
.\" obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
.\" files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
.\" restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy,
.\" modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies
.\" of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
.\" included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
.\" NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\"
.TH hex2cmd 1 2008-06-26 xtrs
.SH Name
hex2cmd \- convert Intel hex format to TRS-80 CMD format
.SH Synopsis
.B hex2cmd
.RI [ infile ]
.SH Description
.B hex2cmd
reads the specified
.I infile
(or standard input if none is given) in Intel hex format (also known as S-record
format), and writes a TRS-80 CMD file to standard output.
An S-record that asks for 0 bytes to be loaded at address
.I A
sets the transfer address (entry point) of the CMD file to
.IR A ;
otherwise the CMD file is given no transfer address.
.SH See also
.BR xtrs (1)
.PP
The
.\" If GNU roff, use hyphenless breakpoints.
.ie \n[.g] .UR http://\:www.tim-mann.org/\:misosys.html
.el .UR http://www.tim-mann.org/misosys.html
.IR "LDOS Quarterly" ,
April 1, 1982 (Vol 1, No 4)
.UE ,
has documentation of the TRS-80 DOS CMD file format.
.\" $Id$
.\" vim:set et ft=nroff tw=80:
